Add enums to schema (#13)
cedar-policy/rfcs: text/0013-schema-enums.md

# Enums in Schemas

## Related issues and PRs

- Reference Issues: 
- Implementation PR(s): 

## Timeline

- Start Date: 2023-06-30
- Date Entered FCP:
- Date Accepted:
- Date Landed:

## Summary

> Add support for enumerations of `bool`, `string`, and `long` types in schemas, and use this information when doing policy validation and schema-based-parsing.

Reviewer: I'm not fully convinced we should add long enums at the same time as we have long ranges PR is progress. We should think a bit more carefully about how they behave when in the language together.

Author: I agree this warrants more conversation.

* If the field `enum` is present, its value MUST be a non-empty list. 
* If the field `enum` is present, and it's in a `Long` specification, the values in the list MUST be numbers.
* If the field `enum` is present, and it's in a `String` specification, the values in the list MUST be strings.
* If the field `enum` is present, and it's in a `Boolean` specification, the values in the list MUST be booleans.

The presence of the `enum` field has the validator interpret the specification as a union between singleton types for everything in the `enum` list.

We can extend the validator to support singleton types for strings and numbers, and to allow union types for strings, booleans, and numbers. We have singleton types for booleans already, where bool is equivalent to the union true|false. This feature would generalize the same approach to numbers and strings.

For the future addition of numeric ranges to schemas, you could technically have both enumerations and ranges, but the enumeration can be checked against the range at validation time, and then the range can be ignored.

Like other types, enums are usable in the "common types" mechanism.

> ### Detailed Use Cases

Reviewer: Add an example for improved error detection in polices:

```
permit(principal, action, resource) when {
  principal.department == "ales"
};
```

We can type the equality as `False`, which would float up as a validation error. If we're clever we can raise an error sooner if we notice that equality that it will never be true. (Harder than it might seem because that could be `false` for only some query environments.

# Enums in Schemas

## Related issues and PRs

- Reference Issues: 
- Implementation PR(s): 

## Timeline

- Start Date: 2023-06-30
- Date Entered FCP:
- Date Accepted:
- Date Landed:

## Summary

Add support for enumerations of `bool`, `string`, and `long` types in schemas, and use this information when doing policy validation and schema-based-parsing.

## Basic example

Maintaining backward compatibility with JSON schema as much as possible, we can match its enum feature. For example:

```json
"type": "Record",
  "attributes": {
    "color": {
      "type": "String",

>       "enum" : ["red", "blue", "green"]

Reviewer 2: I'd prefer `choices` to `enum` as the field name.

Reviewer 3: That sounds sensible to me.  Or `options`

Reviewer 4: We want to follow what JSON schema does. That's `enum`. https://json-schema.org/understanding-json-schema/reference/enum

Reviewer 3: Oh, in that case yes let's do that

# Enums in Schemas

## Related issues and PRs

- Reference Issues: 
- Implementation PR(s): 

## Timeline

- Start Date: 2023-06-30
- Date Entered FCP:
- Date Accepted:
- Date Landed:

## Summary

> Add support for enumerations of `bool`, `string`, and `long` types in schemas, and use this information when doing policy validation and schema-based-parsing.

Reviewer 5: I imagine enumerations will be most useful for strings, so I think we should consider restricting the scope of this RFC to only `string`s.
* Enumerations could possibly be useful for `long`s too (e.g. for error codes), but that case can also be encoded using `string`s. The `long` type doesn't necessarily give an advantage because I doubt you would want to do `long`-specific operations on the values in the enum (e.g., addition, less-than comparison). 
* I don't think enums will be useful for `bool` (what is the point of a field that always has to be `true`?).

If I'm wrong, and you had specific use cases in mind, then please add them to the RFC.

Author: Mike had a use case for bools, I'll add that. Longs just seems intuitive, but you're right you could model it with strinsg as well

Reviewer 3: I'm curious about the use case for bools.  I don't see the harm in supporting longs and bools in addition to strings.

Author: Added use cases

## Basic example

> Maintaining backward compatibility with JSON schema as much as possible, we can match its enum feature. For example:

Reviewer 3: "backward compatibility" might be a strange way to word this, perhaps just "compatibility" or "inspiration from"?

```json
"type": "Record",
  "attributes": {
    "color": {
      "type": "String",
      "enum" : ["red", "blue", "green"]
    }
}
```

The enum part limits the color attribute to one of three possibilities. We would permit enumerations of this flavor for numbers and booleans too.

## Motivation

> Enumerations are a common need, and this change supports them in Cedar. It avoids the mistake of expecting a string (say) to match only a few values, but then it inadvertently matches too many.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Enumerations are a common need, and this change supports them in Cedar. It avoids the mistake of expecting a string (say) to match only a few values, but then encountering a different value at runtime.
```

Enumerations are particularly useful for policy building UIs -- the UI can look at the schema to know what values are valid for a particular attribute.

Enumerations are also useful for schema-based parsing, and reject entities/contexts that don't properly pick a value from the enumeration.

## Detailed design

Schema specification:
* The types `String`, `Bool`, and `Long` MAY have a field `enum` in their specification. 
* If the field `enum` is not present the semantics is unchanged.

> * If the field `enum` is present, it's value MUST be a non-empty list. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* If the field `enum` is present, its value MUST be a non-empty list. 
```

* If the field `enum` is present, and it's in a `Boolean` specification, the values in the list MUST be booleans.

The presence of the `enum` field has the validator interpret the specification as a union between singleton types for everything in the `enum` list.

We can extend the validator to support singleton types for strings and numbers, and to allow union types for strings, booleans, and numbers. We have singleton types for booleans already, where bool is equivalent to the union true|false. This feature would generalize the same approach to numbers and strings.

For the future addition of numeric ranges to schemas, you could technically have both enumerations and ranges, but the enumeration can be checked against the range at validation time, and then the range can be ignored.

Like other types, enums are usable in the "common types" mechanism.

## Drawbacks

Why should we *not* do this? Please consider:

- implementation cost, both in term of code size and complexity
- integration of this feature with other existing and planned features
- cost of migrating existing Cedar applications (is it a breaking change?)

> There are tradeoffs to choosing any path. Attempt to identify them here.

Reviewer 5: Still needs to be filled out.

## Alternatives

### Alternative 1: Don't support it

> ### Alternative 2: Different syntax

Reviewer 4: Unless we have a good reason to not use JSON schema, e.g., it's inadequate for some important use-case, I don't think there's a good reason for an alternative.

There are many different syntax decisions we could make here. Here's an example that puts the fact the type is an enum for front and center:
```json
{
  "type" : "Record",
  "attributes" : {
    "color" : {
      "type" : "Enum",
      "values" : ["red", "blue", "green"]
    }
  }
}
```

> In this case, we don't specify the `Enum` is a subset of `String`, as that's implicit.

Reviewer 3: Having the "parent type" implicit is an interesting idea.  One could imagine even supporting enums of heterogeneous types, or of types like entity-literal. 
```
"values": ["red", 2, User::"alice"]
```
That's probably a bad idea, but with the syntax here, we'd be leaving the door open more easily to extend enums to other types.

## Unresolved questions

> * Do we have any mechanism for enums of extensions types?

Reviewer 3: This would be much easier with the syntax in Alternative 2

> * Do we want any way to support exhaustive case statements?

Reviewer 5: > Do we want any way to support exhaustive case statements?
 
That sounds like an RFC in its own right. Maybe flesh out some of the details and proposed syntax here?

Author: Agree it should be it's own RFC, and it's a two way door to not have it in this one

> * Any reason to support empty enums?

Reviewer 5: > Any reason to support empty enums?

I don't think so. The meaning of that would just be a field that has no valid value, right?

Author: correct

Reviewer 3: The only reason I could see this would be if you are generating a schema programmatically from some other representation of the data, and where empty-enum (no valid value) would be a natural thing to generate for some edge case
